Introduction to the  
Emergency Severity Index
In 2018, there were more than 143 million visits to emergency 
departments (EDs) in the United States  (U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, 2021). Identification of patient 
acuity based on ED presentation is a crucial piece of effective and safe 
emergency department care. Accurate triage reduces patient morbidity 
and mortality. The purpose of triage is to rapidly sort patients presenting 
for emergency department care, prioritizing those who are in more 
immediate need of care. This chapter presents evidence for the utility 
of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI), a standardized 5-level triage tool. 
Standardization of Triage Acuity  
in the U.S.
Crowding in emergency departments has been a serious problem for 
many years, often resulting in long wait times for patients. The use 
of a standardized triage system with clear application and evaluative 
processes is key to safe patient care. T riage standardization also provides 
the capability to support clinical care through research activities,  
ED surveillance, and benchmarking capabilities (Barthell et al., 2004; 
Gilboy et al., 1999; Handler et al., 2004). 
The American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) and the 
Emergency Nurses Association (ENA) recognized the need for triage 
standardization in 2003. A policy statement supporting standardization 
(2010), most recently updated in 2017, states, “Based on expert 
consensus of currently available evidence, ACEP and ENA support the 
adoption of a scientifically validated triage scale such as the Emergency 
Severity Index (ESI)” (ACEP, 2017, p.1). Following the initial adoption 
of this policy statement, the number of EDs using 3-level triage systems 
decreased, and the number of EDs using the ESI triage system increased 
significantly (McHugh et al., 2012). Currently, 94% of U.S. EDs use ESI 
(W orth et al., 2019).
Other triage scales in use (e.g., the Australasian T riage Scale [A TS], the 
Canadian T riage and Acuity Scale [CTAS], and the Manchester T riage 
System [MTS]) utilize the triage decision to determine how long the 
patient can wait for care in the ED. Clear definitions of time to physician 
evaluation are an integral part of those algorithms. This represents a 
major difference between ESI, A TS, CTAS, and MTS. The ESI does not 
define expected time intervals to physician evaluation.
Description of the  
Emergency Severity Index 
The ESI is a 5-level triage acuity scale developed by ED physicians 
Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in the U.S. (Gilboy et al., 1999; Wuerz 
et al., 2000). The ESI was developed around a new conceptual model 
of ED triage as a proxy measure of physiologic stability and risk for 
deterioration. For patients determined to be stable, prediction of 
resources necessary to move the patient to a final disposition (admission, 
discharge, or transfer) is used to further differentiate patient acuity.  
The ESI retains the traditional foundation of initially evaluating patient 
urgency and then seeks to maximize patient streaming: getting the right 
patient to the right resources at the right place and the right time. 
Research on the  
Emergency Severity Index 
The ESI has been studied and evaluated in the United States, across 
other countries and languages, and across age groups demonstrating 
reliability and validity (Aeimchanbanjong & Pandee, 2017; Baumann 
& Strout, 2007; Blomaard et al., 2020; Chmielewski & Moretz, 2022; 
Durani et al., 2009; Ebrahimi et al., 2020; Platts-Mills et al., 2010; 
T akaoka et al., 2021; T ravers et al., 2009).
While research data support the use of ESI, education is needed to 
ensure appropriate application and implementation of the index. 
Studies on the application of ESI demonstrate 59% accuracy in 
assigning acuity (Jordi et al., 2015; Mistry et al., 2018). Given the low 
accuracy rate, learning how to properly apply the algorithm is key to 
accurately assigning acuity levels.
Benefits of Using the ESI 
ESI is the most used triage scale in the United States, and its adoption 
internationally is growing (Mistry et al., 2018, Hinson et al., 2019).  
ED clinicians, managers, and researchers at those sites have identified 
several benefits of ESI triage over conventional 3-level scales. One benefit 
of using a 5-level acuity scale is the rapid identification of patients who 
need immediate interventions and treatment. The focus of 5-level acuity 
scales is on identification of unstable and high-risk patient situations and 
quick sorting of patients in the setting of constrained resources.

ESI triage is a summative clinical judgment that assists in the rapid 
sorting into five groups. The five groups reflect clinically meaningful 
differences in physiological and psychological stability based on the 
assessment of vital signs and projected resource needs. Use of the ESI for 
this rapid sorting can lead to improved flow of patients through the ED, 
with highest acuity patients being identified and treated first. Assessing 
the department’s patient acuity burden based on ESI can inform staffing 
needs. While patient throughput and flow is outside the scope of ESI, 
some departments utilize it to safely assign patients to treatment areas 
outside the main department. 
Nurses using the ESI have reported the tool facilitates communication 
of patient acuity more effectively than the former 3-level triage scales 
(Wuerz et al., 2001). For example, the triage nurse can tell the charge 
nurse, “I need a bed for a level-1 patient,” and through this common 
language, the charge nurse understands that the patient is unstable 
without a detailed explanation of the patient’s condition by the triage 
nurse. Understanding patient acuity in the ED waiting room may 
provide department and hospital stakeholders with the ability to make 
decisions regarding additional organizational resources to facilitate ED 
throughput. 
Summary 
ESI has been shown to be a uniquely effective triage tool. Evidence 
demonstrates its reliability and validity. Evidence also suggests the 
need for high quality education in its use in order to triage accurately. 
ESI provides benefits such as rapid identification of patients needing 
immediate treatment, improved patient flow, information concerning 
staffing needs, and improved communication.

Algorithms are frequently used in emergency care. Emergency 
clinicians are familiar with algorithms to guide and prioritize 
care from courses such as Advanced Cardiovascular Life 
Support and Pediatric Advanced Life Support. These courses present a 
step-by-step approach to clinical decision-making that can be applied to 
practice. The ESI algorithm follows the same principles. 
This chapter presents an overview of how to assign a triage acuity level 
using the ESI algorithm and concludes with some common errors 
in application of the algorithm. Subsequent chapters elaborate on 
each decision point, explaining key concepts and population-specific 
information in more detail. Numerous examples are included in each 
chapter to clarify the specific points of ESI. 
Conceptual Overview 
The algorithm consists of four decision points. The decision points 
must be performed in order, but higher acuity patients will only require 
one or two decision points to assign an acuity level. Figure 2-1 is a simple 
conceptual overview depicting the decision steps as A, B, C, and D, with 
corresponding questions and resulting ESI acuity levels of 1 to 5.
The ESI is intended for use by nurses with both emergency nursing and 
triage experience. The first decision the triage nurse makes is regarding 
stability. If a patient does not meet high risk instability criteria (ESI level 
1 or 2), the triage nurse then evaluates expected resource needs to help 
determine a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5). 
Acuity judgements are initially based on assessment of physiological 
or psychological stability and the need for immediate lifesaving 
intervention. Decision point A is the only one needed for ESI level-1 
patients, who are defined as in need of immediate lifesaving intervention. 
Decision point B is used to determine whether the patient is likely to 
deteriorate and/or require more immediate care based on symptom 
presentation and patient risk factors. These patients are assigned an ESI 
level of 2. Both of these decisions may require a full set of vital signs and 
a focused assessment prior to reaching such a determination. 
Decision point C is used only after level 1 and 2 are excluded and patients 
are determined to be physiologically stable with low risk for deterioration. 
This step requires the anticipation of resources needed during a typical 
ED course for patients with similar presentations. Resources are listed in 
the full algorithm and further elaborated on in Chapter 5. ESI levels 3, 4, 
and 5 are based on how many resources the nurse anticipates will be used 
to reach a disposition decision. 
Decision point D incorporates vital signs to identify more subtle high-
risk presentations or an immediate need for lifesaving interventions and 
to reassess the acuity decision, potentially resulting in assignment of a 
higher acuity level as appropriate.
T o summarize, there are four conceptual decision points used in the ESI 
algorithm to determine an acuity level:
A. Is this patient unstable and in nseed of immediate lifesaving 
intervention? 
B. Is this a high-risk situation?
C. How many resources will this patient need?
D. Do the patient’s vital signs warrant a reassessment of the acuity 
level? 
Figure 2-1. Emergency Severity Index  
Conceptual Algorithm 
Requires lifesaving intervention?
High risk-confused/distress?
How many resources?
None One Many
High-risk vital signs?
A
B
C
D

5, 4, 3
Yes
No
No
No
Reassess acuity 
decision
Yes

Detailed Algorithm 
Figure 2-2 depicts the full algorithm with elaboration on the criteria 
for each decision point. (A similar representation is presented in 
Appendix B, “ESI T riage Algorithm, v5”.) The algorithm assumes the 
user has sufficient clinical knowledge to identify physiologic instability, 
determine risk of deterioration, and anticipate resource needs.  
This knowledge is based on emergency care experience and 
familiarity with the course typical of patient ED presentations. 
Comprehensive educational programs can be used to partially fill this 
gap for inexperienced clinicians but does not replace knowledge gained 
through clinical experience. 
Figure 2-2. ESI Triage Algorithm, Version 5 
Requires immediate lifesaving 
intervention?
High-risk situation?
or
Confused/lethargic/disoriented?
or
Severe pain/distress?
How many different resources are 
needed?
None One Many
High-risk vital signs?
< 1 mo
1–12 mo
1–3 y
3–5 y
5–12 y
12–18 y
> 18 y
> 190
> 180
> 140
> 120
> 120
> 100
> 100
> 60
> 55
> 40
> 35
> 30
> 20
> 20
SpO2 < 92%
Age HR RR
A
B
C
D

Yes
No
No
No
Reassess acuity
decision
Yes
5, 4, 3
A. Immediate life-saving intervention required: Airway or respiratory 
support, emergency medications, hemodynamic interventions such as 
fluid resuscitation or blood products 
Clinical presentations requiring lifesaving interventions include the 
following: intubated, unresponsive, pulselessness, apneic, severe 
respiratory distress, profound hypotension or hypoglycemia. 
Unresponsiveness is defined as a patient who either: 
 1. Is nonverbal and not following commands (acutely)  
 OR 
 2. Requires noxious stimulus (P or U on AVPU scale) 
B. High-risk situation: May become unstable, have high risk for 
deterioration, or exhibit newly altered mental status. Severe pain or 
distress is determined by patient report, corroborated with clinical 
observation.
C. Resources: Count the number of different types of resources, not the 
individual tests or radiographs.  
(For example, complete blood count, electrolytes, and coagulant studies 
equal one resource because they are all laboratory tests, while complete 
blood count plus chest radiograph equals two resources because one is 
a laboratory test and one is imaging). 
ESI Resources Not ESI Resources
•  Labs (blood, urine) 
•  Electrocardiogram, radiographs 
•  Computed tomography, 
magnetic resonance imaging, 
ultrasound, angiography 
•  Intravenous fluids (hydration) 
•  Intravenous, intramuscular, or 
nebulized medications 
•  Specialty consultation 
•  Simple procedure = 1 (laceration 
repair, urinary catheter) 
•  Complex procedure = 2 
(procedural sedation)
•  History and physicaI exam  
(Including pelvic) 
•  Point-of-care testing 
•  Saline or heparin lock 
•  Oral medications 
•  Tetanus immunization
•  Prescription refills 
•  Phone call to primary care 
physician 
•  Simple wound care (dressings, 
recheck) 
•  Crutches, splints, slings
D. High-risk vital signs: Reassess to determine whether the patient 
warrants a higher acuity level if a patient has one or more vital signs 
outside the normal parameters for the patient.
Pediatric Fever Considerations 
1-28 days of age: Assign at least ESI 2 if T > 38° C (100.4 ° F) 
1-3 months: Consider assigning ESI 2 if T > 38 ° C (100.4 ° F) 
3 months and older: Consider assigning ESI 2 or 3 if: 
 1. T > 39°C (102.2°F) or < 36°C (96.8°F), or 
 2. Incomplete immunizations,  
 OR 
 3. No obvious source of fever

CHAPTER 2 –Overview of the ESI Algorithm 7
The Purpose of Acuity Levels 
ESI is a triage acuity algorithm that is valid for evaluating patient 
acuity and resource needs as determined by a trained triage nurse 
upon the patient’s presentation to the emergency department. The ESI 
tool was developed to categorize patients by acuity and direct stable 
patients to resources upon presentation. It is a process to differentiate 
between those who are at risk of decompensation and those who are 
more stable. The validity and reliability of the tool have been tested 
in the triage environment, and it was not developed to be a means of 
updating or communicating a change in patient condition after the 
provider has seen the patient.
Changing Triage Acuity 
The initial ESI acuity level represents a summative clinical judgment 
on the patient’s physiologic or psychological stability. Prior to a 
provider evaluation, a patient change in condition can be reflected in 
an amended ESI level. What is critical to this process is documentation 
of the change in condition, the reason for the change in ESI level, and 
the resultant action by the nurse.
A dangerous but not uncommon practice is for colleagues to question 
the assigned acuity level or pressure the triage nurse to downgrade 
the patient based on the environmental conditions (crowding, 
boarding, staffing) (W olf et al., 2018). The ESI level assigned by the 
nurse should reflect the patient’s current risk, not the environmental 
conditions of the ED. Nor should the ESI level be used to manipulate 
metrics such as door-to-ECG or door-to-CT times.
Bias and Stigma 
The process of clinical decision-making is by its nature subjective, 
although there are objective ways to measure efficacy and accuracy. 
The correct application of the ESI algorithm relies on the emergency 
nurse to objectively assess each patient. Racial, age, and gender 
bias can impede accuracy in triage decision-making by causing 
nurses to ignore critical cues. Hinson et al. (2018), noted that high-
risk presentations often went unrecognized across their general 
population, while López et al.  (2010), Schrader and Lewis (2013), 
Puumala et al. (2016), and Zook et al. (2016), all noted undertriage 
in minority populations of all ages. Vigil et al. (2015) reported that 
Black patients in the V eterans Administration system were assigned 
less urgent ESI scores than white patients, and this effect was more 
pronounced for Black male patients than Black female patients.  
A similar outcome was found for Hispanic male patients. Grossmann 
et al. (2014) found significant undertriage in geriatric populations, 
and Arslanian-Engoren (2004) described inaccurate triage decisions 
made by emergency nurses about women presenting with chest pain. 
Patients presenting to the ED who have a past or current history of 
behavioral health issues or substance use are particularly susceptible 
to the effects of bias and stigma (Helmke., 2021). Patients who are 
described as “difficult” are perceived similarly (Mamede et al., 2017). 
It is critically important for the nurse to self-reflect, identify implicit 
and explicit bias, and use that knowledge to mitigate barriers to 
accurate assessment in triage. Experience does not always translate 
to expertise: more-experienced nurses tend to undertriage and less 
experienced nurses to overtriage (Levis-Elmelech et al., 2022).
Summary 
The Emergency Severity Index is meant for use by nurses with both 
emergency nursing and triage experience. When a patient presents to 
the ED, the nurse follows decision points A through D to objectively 
assess them and assign an appropriate ESI acuity level. 
At decision point A of the ESI algorithm, the determination 
needs to be made whether the patient requires immediate 
lifesaving interventions (Figure 3-1). Signs of instability 
requiring immediate, lifesaving intervention include unresponsiveness, 
active seizure, occluded airway, ineffective gas exchange, and ineffective/
decreased perfusion (Giri et al., 2022; Siquera Moura et al., 2022). When 
these signs are present, the patient is assigned an ESI level of 1. 
Figure 3-1. Decision Point A:  
Is Lifesaving Intervention Required? 
Requires immediate life-saving 
intervention?
A

Yes
No
Examples of ESI Level-1 Criteria
Examples of ESI level-1 criteria include the following:
• Ineffective airway clearance
• Ineffective respiratory pattern
• Impaired gas exchange
• Ineffective tissue perfusion 
• Obtunded/unresponsive patient
•  SpO2 < 90% that is not the patient’s norm, with other signs of 
respiratory compromise
• Anaphylaxis  
•  Hypotension with signs of hypoperfusion  
(e.g., Chest pain with signs of hypoperfusion and systolic blood 
pressure of 80 mm Hg)
• Hypoglycemia 
• Severe bradycardia or tachycardia 
• Flaccid infant 
• Cardiac and/or pulmonary arrest (or appears to be imminent) 
•  Penetrating trauma of head, neck, abdomen, chest requiring  
a lifesaving intervention
Level-1 Considerations 
Level-1 considerations include method of arrival at the ED and the 
relationship between disposition and initial acuity level. In order to 
help explain the level-1 decision further, T able 3-1 provides a list of 
lifesaving interventions.
Table 3-1. Examples of Lifesaving Interventions
Intervention Type Lifesaving Interventions 
Airway/breathing
Assisted ventilation  
Intubation  
Surgical airway  
Emergent non-invasive 
positive pressure ventilation
Electrical Therapy
Defibrillation  
Emergent cardioversion  
External pacing
Procedures
Chest needle decompression 
Pericardiocentesis  
Open thoracotomy 
Hemodynamics
Significant intravenous fluid 
resuscitation
Blood administration
Control of external 
hemorrhage
Medications
Adenosine 
Atropine  
Dextrose 
Dopamine  
Epinephrine  
(including IM for anaphylaxis) 
Naloxone 
Note that diagnostics are not interventions. For example, a CT scan for a stroke or 
use of the catheterization lab for hemodynamically stable patients are diagnostics 
but not interventions.

10 EMERGENCY SEVERITY INDEX – V5
THE PROBLEM OF GEOGRAPHY 
An ESI level-1 patient is not always brought to the emergency 
department by ambulance but may be dropped at the front door. 
Infants and children, because they are “portable,” may be brought 
to the ED by car and carried into the emergency department. The 
triage nurse should not consider the method of arrival as a barrier to 
assigning the appropriate ESI level. 
DISPOSITION DOES NOT EQUAL INITIAL ACUITY 
There are certain ESI level-1 patients who may be discharged from 
the ED if they have a reversible cause for the change in level of 
consciousness or vital functions, such as with hypoglycemia, alcohol 
intoxication, drug or other substance overdose, or anaphylaxis.  
The likelihood of discharge does not have an impact on assigning ESI 1.
Summary 
The patient who meets criteria for an ESI level-1 designation shows 
signs of deterioration; intervention must be rapid and appropriate.
If it is determined that the patient does not meet ESI level-1 criteria, 
the nurse moves to decision point B (Figure 4-1). At decision point 
B, the nurse assesses whether this patient is high-risk or likely to 
deteriorate. If the situation is high-risk or the patient is at elevated risk 
for physical or psychological deterioration, the patient is triaged as ESI 
level 2. Research findings suggest that nurse accuracy at decision point 
B is about 43% (Ivanov et al., 2021). Proper use of the ESI is especially 
useful for the older adult population. Studies demonstrate that 
individuals 65 years of age and older are at an increased risk of inaccurate 
triage acuity assignment, or under-triage, increasing their risk of adverse 
patient outcomes (Blomaard et al., 2020). It is crucial for the nurse to 
understand the criteria to prevent patients being under-triaged. 
Figure 4-1. Decision Point B: High-Risk Presentation 
High-risk situation?
or
Confused/lethargic/disoriented?
or
Severe pain/distress?
B

No
Yes
The following questions are used to determine whether the patient 
meets the Level-2 high-risk criteria: 
• Is the situation high-risk? 
• Is the patient likely to deteriorate? 
• Does the patient have an acute change in mental status? 
•  Is the patient in severe pain or distress (physiological or 
psychological)? 
Is This a High-Risk Situation? 
The patient who is high-risk can be identified through patient 
interview, assessment, and collection of confirmatory data. A high-
risk patient is one whose condition could easily deteriorate or who 
presents with symptoms suggestive of a condition requiring time-
sensitive treatment. This is a patient who has a potential threat to life, 
limb, sight, or organ. Vital sign assessment can be critically important 
to correctly identifying these high-risk patients. Specifically, abnormal 
respiratory rate and high pulse rate have been found to be independent 
predictors of adverse events or deterioration (Chaboyer et al., 2008). 
Similarly, there is a large body of research showing that other indicators 
such as heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation,  
level of consciousness, temperature, age, and cardiac complaints are also 
associated with, or predictors of, deterioration in patients (Considine et 
al., 2012, Goldhill & McNarry, 2004; Hillman et al., 2002). 
Unrecognized or unmanaged abnormalities of these vital signs 
(i.e., Glasgow Coma Scale [GCS] score, blood pressure, heart rate, 
respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation) is significantly associated with 
higher mortality rates (Buist et al., 2004), highlighting the importance 
of monitoring a wide range of vital signs to identify deterioration in 
the patient’s health status. 
NOTE Geriatric Considerations. Geriatric patients may not 
produce immune or compensatory responses due to age or 
medications used to manage chronic conditions (Martin et al., 
2010; Melady & Perry, 2018). Consider vital signs in  
the context of medications before assigning an ESI level.  
(For more information see the ENA course “Geriatric 
Emergency Nursing Education (GENE) Level I 2.0”)

Examples of high-risk situations include the following: 
•  Active chest pain, suspicious for acute coronary syndrome but 
does not require an immediate lifesaving intervention. 
• Signs of a stroke but does not meet level-1 criteria. 
• A possible ectopic pregnancy, hemodynamically stable.
•  A patient on chemotherapy, and therefore 
immunocompromised, with a fever. 
•  T ransplant recipient presenting with a fever or other 
indication of infection. 
• Actively suicidal or homicidal patient 
•  A needle stick in a health care worker (time sensitive to 
postexposure prophylaxis treatment) 
• Sexual assault survivor 
• Increasing respiratory effort 
• Postpartum hemorrhage 
Is the Patient Experiencing New Onset 
Confusion, Lethargy, or Disorientation? 
At decision point B of the ESI algorithm, the presence of confusion, 
lethargy, or disorientation refers to a new onset or an altered mental 
status (AMS). In broad terms, AMS indicates a change in the level 
of consciousness and/or orientation from a patient’s baseline mental 
status. However, other clinical signs, such as confusion, somnolence, 
agitation, or belligerence, are commonly referred to as AMS (Smith 
& Masterson, 2023). Approximately 5–10% of ED visits are for AMS 
(Smith & Han, 2019), with up to 40% of ED visits in the geriatric 
population (Smith & Han, 2019).
AMS is a high-risk complaint and may be caused by a variety of 
serious medical conditions including hypoxia, hypoglycemia, or 
hyponatremia, underperfusion due to occlusion or vascular collapse, 
increased intracranial pressure, or toxicological conditions. If the 
patient’s history is unknown, and the patient presents as confused, 
lethargic, or disoriented, the nurse should assume this condition is 
new and assign an ESI level 2.
Is the Patient Experiencing Severe Pain or 
Distress?
Pain is the most common presenting symptom, with up to 78% of 
ED visits involving pain (Cordell et al., 2002) and 11.75% involving 
abdominal pain specifically (Hooker et al., 2019). The patient should 
be assessed for the presence of severe pain or distress. All patients 
who have a pain rating of 7/10 or greater should be considered 
for meeting ESI level-2 criteria. This is an often-misinterpreted  
criterion of ESI. Because pain may or may not be proportional  
to actual tissue damage (Schiavenato & Craig, 2010), not all patients 
with a pain score greater than 7 should be triaged as ESI level 2,  
and every patient who presents with severe pain should be thoroughly 
assessed. 
If the pain is a result of an orthopedic injury, for example, assuming 
no neurovascular compromise, the nurse can implement comfort 
measures at triage including ice, elevation, and analgesics (if standing 
orders are in place) to reduce the pain. The nurse should accept 
the patient’s pain rating is 10/10 and address the pain at triage.  
However, this patient can wait to be seen, and the resources needed to 
reach a disposition should be determined. Patients experiencing severe 
pain or distress as a result of a systemic disruption, for example, renal 
colic, cancer, or sickle cell crisis, should be triaged as ESI level 2, and 
placement should be facilitated as quickly as possible. 
Distress 
Psychological distress can be described as emotional suffering, a negative 
psychological reaction to threats to personal life goals and can affect 
up to 47% of ED patients who present for medical care (Faessler et 
al., 2016). In consideration of assigning an ESI level 2, the nurse must 
assess for severe distress, which can be physiological or psychological. 
Examples of patient behavior or experiences reflecting or resulting in 
severe psychological distress include the following:
• Distraught after experiencing a sexual assault 
• Behavioral outbursts at triage 
• Combativeness 
• Survivor of sexual violence 
• Survivor of domestic violence 
• Acute grief reaction 
• Suicidal ideation, plan, or attempt 
• Prenatal loss 
The following sections provides a nonexhaustive list of examples of 
other presenting symptoms and red flags that would warrant an ESI 
level-2 assignment. 
Neurological Concerns
Almost 3% of all ED visits are for headaches, with about 31% of those 
patients requiring neuroimaging (American College of Emergency 
Physician’s Clinical Policies Subcommittee (Writing Committee) on 
Acute Headache et al., 2019). Most concerning is the “thunderclap 
headache” (a severe, rapid-onset headache), which is often associated 
with subarachnoid hemorrhage (Edlow, 2018) and warrants immediate 
evaluation. Any headache accompanied by neck pain or nuchal rigidity 
falls into this category. Other presentations of concern that warrant 
an ESI 2 designation include headache plus fever, vomiting, lower 
back pain, altered mental status, and/or signs and symptoms of stroke, 
including gross deficits such as aphasia, apraxia, agnosia, or dysarthria 
(Zweifler, 2017).
Patients presenting post-ictal are triaged as ESI level 2 (altered mental 
status). Patients with a known seizure history who are alert and oriented 
after having a seizure prior to ED presentation can be triaged according 
to their physiological presentation and expected resource needs.

NOTE Pediatric Considerations. Neurological concerns 
include the following:
 •  Pediatric patients presenting as alert and appropriate 
after a febrile seizure can be triaged based on their 
physiological assessment and anticipated resource needs. 
 •  A subtle change in a pediatric patient’s mental status can 
be suggestive of a change in hemodynamics and should 
be immediately investigated as high risk. 
Ocular Concerns 
Ocular emergencies represent a small but significant number of cases 
presenting to the ED. They include pathologies that involve sudden 
threats to the visual system that left untreated can lead to permanent 
visual loss or severe threats to visual function (Khare et al., 2008). U.S. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics data shows that approximately 16,000 U.S. 
workers in private industry sustained work-related eye injuries in 2020, 
about a third of which were treated in EDs. The Alphabetic T riage 
score for Ophthalmology (A TSO) score (D’Oria et al., 2020) may be 
useful in stratifying risk; the elements of the score that predict urgency 
include the presence of altered vision; sudden diplopia, anisocoria, 
or exophthalmos; red eye; distress/pain (specifically intolerable pain); 
eye trauma; and “floaters and flashers,” with more symptoms in 
constellation predicting a more emergent problem and serve as a good 
guideline for the triage nurse.
Other common ophthalmic concerns, especially in pediatric patients, can 
include red eyes, traumatic injury, eye pain with headache, and visual loss 
(Henríquez-Recine et al., 2020; Noval et al., 2020). The most frequent 
diagnoses in the pediatric population are conjunctivitis, corneal erosion, 
and allergic conjunctivitis (Henríquez-Recine et al., 2020; Noval et al., 
2020); few of these merit an ESI level-2 designation.
Ear, Nose, and Throat Concerns 
Airway emergencies may affect adults and children, upper (croup, 
epiglottitis, neck abscess, bleeding tonsil) and lower (foreign body 
aspiration, lower bleeding) airways, as well as natural and artificially 
created airways (e.g., tracheostomy) (Klein, 2019; Sokolovs & T an, 
2020). Patients who are unable to manage their own secretions and/or 
exhibit respiratory stridor are extremely high-risk patients and should be 
assigned an ESI level of 2. Airway emergencies are clinical diagnoses and 
care should be initiated rapidly.
Several etiologies of epistaxis represent high-risk situations. Examples 
include brisk bleeding secondary to posterior nosebleed or when 
experienced by a patient with known thrombocytopenia, clotting 
dyscrasias, and use of warfarin or other anti-coagulants (Krulewitz 
& Fix, 2019; Hamlett et al., 2021). In these situations, patients are 
assigned an ESI level of 2. 
NOTE Pediatric Considerations. Esophageal button battery 
ingestion has a high risk of complication, especially in children 
less than 6 years of age and involving batteries greater than 
20 mm in diameter (Mubarak et al., 2021). This presentation is 
extremely time sensitive.
Respiratory Concerns 
The high-risk patient is one who is currently ventilating and oxygenating 
adequately but is in respiratory distress and has the potential to rapidly 
deteriorate. Signs of distress can include tachypnea, tachycardia, 
tripoding, speaking in short, 2-to-3-word sentences; audible stridor; 
wheezing; or congestion. Patients with mild to moderate distress 
should be further evaluated for respiratory rate and pulse oximetry 
to determine whether they should be categorized as ESI level 2. 
Patients in severe respiratory distress who require immediate lifesaving 
intervention, such as intubation, meet level-1 criteria. 
NOTE Pediatric Considerations. Grunting, belly breathing, 
and retractions suggest respiratory distress. In the pediatric 
patient, the arc of decline can be precipitous. 
Cardiovascular 
Cardiovascular complaints may include presentations such as chest 
pain, difficulty breathing, hypoperfusion, weakness, dizziness, and 
bleeding. Undertriage of these patients can result in poor patient 
outcomes (T sai et al., 2016). Chest pain specifically accounts for 
5–10% of US emergency department visits (Sakamoto et al., 2016), 
yet the presentation of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) is not always 
symptom specific, and it is sometimes difficult to determine the risk 
of ACS during the triage assessment. Patients with cardiac events may 
present with fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and/or weakness, rather than 
the more “classic” chest pain. There are gender and sex differences in 
assessment and identification (Gao et al., 2019) that the triage nurse 
should be aware of, paying close attention to female patients.
Patients with chest pain who are physiologically unstable and require 
immediate interventions such as intubation or hemodynamic support 
should be triaged as ESI level 1. 
An ECG within 10 minutes for patients with concerns of chest pain 
may also be helpful in determining acuity. If the ECG is abnormal, 
patients would be assigned level 2. 
NOTE A recent Covid-19 infection increases cardiac risk 
(Boukhris et al., 2020) regardless of age, sex, or menopausal 
status.

Abdominal and Gastrointestinal Concerns 
Abdominal pain is a common presentation to the ED (Kamin et al., 
2003) and presents a triage challenge—causes of abdominal pain can 
be emergent or benign (Medford-Davis et al., 2016). A major cause 
of diagnostic errors involving abdominal pain is associated with 
inadequate history-taking, so a good history and assessment of current 
pain rating, location, onset, accompanying symptoms and current 
vital signs are important elements in determining the presence or 
absence of a high-risk situation. Abdominal pain can be caused by a 
vascular, genitourinary, infectious, or cardiac issue, rather than have  
a gastrointestinal etiology. 
The literature suggests that up to 31% of patients presenting with 
abdominal pain are undertriaged, with patients over the age of 
80 undertriaged the most (52.1%) (Oh & Kim, 2021). The most 
frequently missed diagnoses include acute gallbladder pathology, 
urinary system infections, diverticulitis, small bowel obstruction, 
appendicitis, cancer, and ectopic pregnancy. Older patients are more 
likely to  experience bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal bleeds, 
mesenteric ischemia, and other abdominal complications associated 
with significantly higher morbidity and mortality than other patients. 
In addition, pregnancy-capable patients who present with abdominal 
pain may be having pregnancy complications or be in labor.
Several important assessment questions can help the triage nurse 
determine whether or not the patient meets high-risk criteria. Such 
questions include the following: 
• Is the patient pregnant or postpartum?
• Does the patient show signs of sepsis?
• Does the patient show signs of hypoperfusion?
• W as there blunt or penetrating trauma to the abdomen?
•  Is the patient’s pain refractory to analgesia, constant, and /or 
maximal on onset?
Differentiation between ESI 2 and ESI 3 in the context of abdominal 
pain may depend on vital signs, patient age, and previous history.
•  Pediatric considerations: In younger children, pneumonia 
can present as abdominal pain. Button battery or earth magnet 
ingestion are time sensitive presentations, with high morbidity 
(Mubarak et al., 2021).
•  Geriatric considerations: Elderly patients with abdominal 
pain are likely to need hospitalization (Lee & Kim, 2019). 
•  Obstetric/gynecological concerns: Abdominal pain with 
vaginal bleeding can suggest ectopic pregnancy or other 
emergent pregnancy complications.
Obstetrical and Gynecological Concerns 
Pregnancy or postpartum status are important data elements that 
can influence understanding of patient risk; patients may or may 
not disclose this information. The maternal death rate in the United 
States is approximately 23.8 per 100,000 live births, (55.3 per 100,000 
deaths in Black women) (Hoyert, 2022), with an increase during the 
COVID-19 pandemic to 25.5 maternal deaths/100,000 live births 
(Thoma & Declercq, 2022). Assessing for current or recent COVID-19 
infection is important to assessing risk.
Critical determinants of acuity include blood pressure; bleeding; 
and abdominal, head, or chest pain. The pregnant or postpartum 
patient with a SBP of < 90 or > 150 should be designated an ESI 2 
even in the absence of other symptoms (Hauspurg & Jeyabalan, 
2022; Prejbisz et al., 2019). Approximately 60% of patients with new, 
delayed-onset postpartum preeclampsia have no antecedent diagnosis 
of a hypertensive disorder of pregnancy (Al-Safi et al, 2011). Pregnant 
patients with chest pain and/or shortness of breath,  abdominal pain,  
or headache (Sperling et al., 2015) should be triaged as ESI 2 and 
rapidly assessed by ED and/or OB providers.
Pregnant patients who present with heavy vaginal bleeding and 
abnormal vitals with suspicion of infection should be categorized at 
ESI level 2. (Heavy vaginal bleeding generally means soaking through 
a pad an hour, plum-sized clots, bright red bleeding that does not slow 
down, or bleeding that has increased after a decrease.)
Postpartum patients presenting with heavy vaginal bleeding should also 
be assigned ESI level 2 and seen by a provider immediately (Borovac-
Pinheiro et al., 2018). Any pregnancy-capable patient, whether 
pregnant or postpartum, who presents with significant hemodynamic 
instability and who needs immediate lifesaving interventions should 
be triaged as ESI level 1.
Genitourinary 
Pain in the male or female genitourinary tract should be investigated 
with respect to history, onset, pain level, and discharge. T esticular or 
scrotal pain should be immediately evaluated for testicular torsion 
(Laher et al., 2020), a time-sensitive clinical situation capable of 
producing permanent organ loss. Similarly, unilateral lower quadrant 
pain in patients with ovaries should be evaluated for ovarian torsion 
and ectopic pregnancy (Bridwell et al., 2022; Rey-Bellet Gasser et al., 
2016).
Males with testicular torsion may complain of severe pain, are easily 
recognized, and require rapid evaluation and surgical intervention in 
addition to rapid pain control. The patient with symptoms of a UTI 
who is elderly (Liang,  2017) or who also complains of back pain, chills, 
and rigors may have urosepsis and should also be assigned to ESI 2. 
Patients presenting with severe flank pain receive a level-2 designation 
(Gelber & Singh, 2021).

Trauma 
Injury results from mechanical or kinetic energy transfer and is caused 
by acceleration forces, deceleration forces, or both. Victims of motor 
vehicle and motorcycle crashes, falls, and gunshot and stab wounds are 
examples of blunt and penetrating trauma, which should be assessed 
carefully for the potential for serious injury. Especially at nontrauma 
centers, it is critical to rapidly identify patients who may need higher 
levels of care (W olf, 2009). In many emergency departments, trauma 
patients can arrive by private vehicle, so a careful assessment of both 
injuries and mechanism is warranted to correctly identify the high-risk 
patient. 
Mechanisms of injury that warrant an ESI 2 designation include falls 
of 20 feet (6 meters) or more, ejection from a vehicle, or removal from 
a vehicle with mechanical extrication tools, and sexual assault. Injuries 
that warrant an ESI level of 2 may include penetrating trauma of 
the head, neck, chest, and abdomen without signs of hemodynamic 
instability.
Specifically, advanced age is a known risk factor for poor outcomes 
among trauma patients, and the severity of injury in older adults 
often exceeds what would normally be expected from the mechanism 
(Jacobs et al., 2003). Occult hypoperfusion with normal vital signs is 
associated with age greater than 55, and so a careful assessment should 
be made in the older patient (Hatton et al., 2020).
Patients with high-risk orthopedic injuries include those presenting 
with any extremity injury with compromised neurovascular function, 
symptoms of compartment syndrome, or partial or complete 
amputations. Patients with possible fractures of the pelvis, femur, or 
dislocations should be carefully evaluated and vital signs considered. 
These injuries can be associated with significant blood loss and 
neurovascular compromise. 
Ingestions 
T oxic ingestion is a high-risk presentation which needs to be rapidly 
evaluated. The drug or substance that was taken and the amount may 
be unknown. Patients who present with alterations in mental status, 
difficulty breathing, changes in breathing pattern, or changes in heart 
rate and/or rhythm without an obvious cause should be evaluated as a 
possible toxic ingestion (Chandran & Krishna, 2019).  
Transplant 
T ransplant recipient patients have a high ED utilization rate even 
after transplant surgery (Lovasik et al., 2018; Unterman et al., 2009).  
Solid organ transplant recipients often present with fever and 
infectious processes and have a high hospitalization rate (McElroy et 
al., 2015; Unterman et al., 2009). Patients presenting with a fever or 
other indication of infection or rejection should be designated ESI 
level 2 due to their immunocompromised status. Patients who are on a 
transplant list are also usually considered high-risk. 
Mental and Behavioral Health 
Emergency department visits for mental/behavioral health concerns 
in the U.S. comprise more than 12% of all visits (Moore et al., 2017). 
Patients who present with specific mental health concerns are at 
high risk if they are a danger either to themselves, others, or the 
environment. A focused assessment of the patient’s potential for self- 
or other-directed harm is critical to establishing an ESI designation. 
Patients who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, or violent should be 
assigned an ESI level of 2 (Sands et al., 2014).  
Summary 
ESI level-2 patients remain a high priority, and placement and 
treatment should be initiated rapidly. ESI level-2 patients have the 
potential to be very ill and at high risk for decompensation. Usually, 
rather than move to the next patient, the triage nurse determines that 
the charge nurse or staff in the patient care area should be immediately 
alerted that they have an ESI level-2 patient. 
W e have reviewed the key components and questions that need to be 
answered to determine whether a patient meets ESI level-2 criteria. It is 
critical that the triage nurse consider these questions as they triage each 
patient. Missing a high-risk situation may result in an extended waiting 
period, increasing the chance of morbidity and mortality.

Once an ESI 1 or 2 designation has been ruled out, the presumed 
stability of the patient enables the nurse to move to the next 
decision point (Figure 5-1). Patients who require two or 
more resources are assigned level 3, those who require one resource 
are assigned level 4, and those who require no resources are assigned  
level 5. The ESI triage acuity tool uses an approach that includes 
the nurse’s judgement about who should be seen first (ESI level 1 
and 2) as well as resource prediction for less acute patients (ESI levels 
3–5). Resource prediction requires the nurse to determine how many 
resources are likely to be used in order for the provider to reach a 
disposition decision, which could include discharge home, admission to 
an observation unit, transfer to another institution or others (T anabe et 
al., 2004). T o determine resource needs the nurse must have familiarity 
with general ED standards of care. This decision point may also require 
the nurse to draw from past experiences in caring for similar patients. 
Resource determination is independent of type of hospital (teaching 
versus nonteaching) and location of the hospital (urban versus rural).  
A patient presenting for care should require the same general resources 
in one ED as in any other ED. 
Figure 5-1 Resource Prediction
How many different resources are 
needed?
None One Many
C
45 3
Common Questions 
There are some common questions about what is considered an ESI 
resource. One question often asked concerns the number of blood or 
urine tests and radiographs that constitute a resource. In the ESI triage 
method, the ED nurse should count the number of different types of 
resources needed to determine the patient’s disposition, not the number 
of individual tests. Illustrative examples follow: 
•  A complete blood count and electrolyte panel comprise one 
resource (lab test).
•  A complete blood count and chest radiograph are two resources 
(lab test, radiograph).
•  A complete blood count and a urinalysis are both lab tests and 
together count as only one resource.
•  A chest radiograph and abdominal radiograph are one resource 
(radiograph).
•  Cervical-spine films and a computed tomography scan of the head 
are two resources (radiograph and computed tomography scan).
T able 5-1 provides further examples of what constitutes a resource and 
what does not. In order to understand what counts as a resource, it is 
important to realize that resources are defined by presentational acuity. 
The purpose of resource prediction in ESI is to sort patients into distinct 
groups and help get the right patient to the right area of the ED.
Summary 
ESI is an approach to ED triage that includes prediction of the number 
of resources needed to make a patient disposition. Consideration of 
resources is included in the triage level assignment for ESI levels 3, 4, 
and 5, while ESI level 1 and 2 decisions are based only on patient acuity. 
Examples of ESI level 3, 4, and 5 patients are presented in T able 5-2. 
Practical experience has demonstrated that resource estimation is very 
beneficial in helping sort the large number of patients with non-acute 
presentations.

Table 5-1 Predicted ESI Resources 
Resources Not Resources 
Labs (blood, urine)
Electrocardiogram, radiographs
Computed tomography, magnetic 
resonance imaging, ultrasound, 
angiography 
History and physical exam (including 
pelvic)
Point-of-care testing
Intravenous fluids (hydration) Saline or heparin lock 
Intravenous, intramuscular, or 
nebulized medications 
Oral medications 
Tetanus immunization
Prescription refills
Specialty consultation Phone call to primary care physician
Simple procedure = 1 
(laceration repair, urinary catheter)
Complex procedure = 2 
(procedural sedation 
Simple wound care  
(dressings, recheck))
Crutches, splints, slings 
Table 5-2 Patient Presentations and Predicting Resources
ESI Level Patient Presentation Interventions Resources

Healthy 3-year-old patient with 
right ear pain, up to date on 
immunizations. Vital signs WNL.
Needs an exam and 
prescription None

A 42-year-old patient who lost 
their rescue inhaler and needs 
a new prescription, Patient is 
asymptomatic and vital signs 
WNL.
Needs an exam and 
prescription None
4 Healthy 19-year-old patient with 
a sore throat. Vital signs WNL
Needs an exam, culture(s)*, 
prescriptions One *

Healthy 29-year-old assigned 
female at birth with dysuria. 
Vitals signs WNL
Needs an exam, urine, 
urine culture, maybe urine 
pregnancy, and prescriptions
One **

A 22-year-old assigned male at 
birth with right lower quadrant 
abdominal pain since early this 
morning, Vital signs WNL
Needs an exam, lab studies, 
Intravenous fluid, abdominal 
computed tomography scan, 
and perhaps surgical consult
Two or more

A 45-year-old patient with left 
lower leg pain and swelling, 
started 2 days ago after a 12-
hour car trip. Vital signs WNL
Needs exam, lab, lower 
extremity non-invasive 
vascular studies
Two or more
* Follow the institution’s policy on what constitutes a resource. For example, there may be a department where throat cultures are not routinely performed; instead, the 
patient is treated based on history and physical exam. If that is the case the patient would be an ESI level 5.
** All three tests count as one resource (labs) 
Wuerz, R., Milne, L. W., Eitel, D. R., Travers, D., & Gilboy, N. (2000). Reliability and validity of a new five-level triage instrument. Academic Emergency Medicine, 7(3), 236–242  
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1553-2712.2000.tb01066.x

To reach this point in the algorithm, the nurse has already 
determined that the patient does not meet ESI level-1 or level-2 
criteria. For patients not meeting ESI level-1 or 2- criteria, a 
complete set of vital signs needs to be obtained to identify the “well-
appearing ill.” This is important for the recognition of patients who 
may appear stable but whose vital signs indicate signs of instability.  
An Iranian study (Nejad et al., 2016) reported that of 551 cases who 
were up-triaged from ESI level 3 to 2, 88.7% had an increased respiratory 
rate and 97.8% had an increased respiratory or heart rate, suggesting that 
vital signs for ESI level 3 patients are important in identifying those who 
should be assigned a higher acuity.
Obtain a full set of vital signs to assist in determining patient acuity. 
This is decision point D in the algorithm (Figure 6-1). When vital signs 
are not obtained, the patient is at risk for being undertriaged, especially 
when presenting with symptoms indicating a lower acuity. The nurse’s 
ability to recognize abnormal vital signs and appropriately act on them is 
crucial to patient outcomes (Cioffi et al., 2006).  
Figure 6-1. High-Risk Vital Signs 
High-risk vital signs?
< 1 mo
1–12 mo
1–3 y
3–5 y
5–12
12–18 y
> 18 y
> 190
> 180
> 140
> 120
> 120
> 100
> 100
> 60
> 55
> 40
> 35
> 30
> 20
> 20
SpO2 < 92%
Age HR RR
D
No
5, 4, 3
Patients who are immediately recognized and categorized as an ESI level 
1 or 2 do not need vitals taken if it is going to delay initiation of care.  
If the patient appears unstable or presents with symptoms that 
necessitate immediate treatment, the patient is directly transported 
to the treatment room, and the treatment begins immediately. For 
these patients, the resuscitation team is responsible for obtaining and 
monitoring vital signs at the bedside. This would include patients who 
have clinical appearances that indicate high risk or need for immediate 
cardiovascular or respiratory intervention. These patients may appear 
pale, diaphoretic, or cyanotic. The nurse can obtain vital signs if it may 
assist in confirming the triage acuity level. Some patients may not be 
identified as ESI level 1 or 2 until vital signs are taken. An awake, alert 
elderly patient who presents with dizziness might be found to have a 
life-threatening condition when a heart rate of 32 beats/minute or 180 
beats/minute is discovered during vital sign measurement. In this case, 
the patient is unstable and should be assigned ESI level 1 no matter how 
“good” the patient appears.
Vital signs explicitly included in the ESI algorithm include heart rate, 
respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation (for patients with potential 
respiratory compromise). An important note is that vital signs must 
be contextualized in light of the patient’s history, medications, and 
presentation. Medications that affect tachycardic compensation for 
hypotension, such as beta blockers, need to be accounted for. Medications 
that blunt a robust immune response, such as corticosteroids, must also 
be noted. Patients may present with medication-mediated “normal” 
vital signs, yet still be quite ill.
Pediatric Vital Signs 
The ED nurse must be familiar with normal vital sign ranges for 
pediatric patients. A full set of vital signs should be attempted in 
triage. The well-appearing, potentially dehydrated or septic patients 
may experience a delay in care if high risk vital signs are not recognized. 
An infant less than 28 days old with a fever is considered high risk and 
is assigned to at least ESI level 2. The patient presenting with a fever, 
non-petechial rash, and incomplete immunizations should prompt 
the triage nurse to consider isolation.  If the patient has an identifiable 
source for the fever and his or her immunizations are up-to-date, then 
a rating of 4 or 5 may be appropriate. For example, a 10-month-old 
who is up-to-date on immunizations, who presents with fever and 
pulling on his ear, could be assigned to ESI level 5.

T able 6-1 lists the normal vital sign ranges for each pediatric age group. 
Table 6-1 Normal Vital Signs for Pediatric Patients by Age Groups
Age Heart Rate  
(beats/min)
Respiratory Rate  
(breaths/min)
Systolic Blood Pressure  
(mm Hg)
Term neonate to <1 month 90–190 35–60 67–84
Infant, 1–12 months 90–180 30–55 72–104
Toddler, 1–3 years 80–140 22–40 86–104
Preschooler, 3–5 years 65–120 18–35 89–112
School age, 5–12 years 70–120 16–30 90–115
Adolescent, 12–18 years 60–100 12–20 100–130
Data from American Heart Association. (2020). Part 4: Systematic approach to the seriously ill or injured child. Pediatric advanced life support provider manual; Ernst, G. 
(2020). Pediatric trauma. In J. E. Tintinalli, O. J. Ma, D. M. Yealy, G. D. Meckler, J. S. Stapczynski, D. M. Cline, & S. H. Thomas (Eds.), Tintinalli’s emergency medicine:  
A comprehensive study guide (9th ed., pp. 689–697). McGraw Hill; Lucia, D., & Glenn, J. (2017). Pediatric emergencies. In C. K. Stone & R. L. Humphries (Eds.),  
Current diagnosis and treatment: Emergency medicine (8th ed., pp. 964–1016). McGraw Hill.
Pediatric Temperatures 
T emperature greater than 38°C (100.4°F) in an infant younger than  
90 days old is a red flag and the patient should be considered high 
risk and assigned at least ESI level 2. A temperature less than 36°C 
(96.8°F) in a child of any age is hypothermic and concerning for sepsis 
(Balamuth et al., 2017). T able 6-2 provides a quick summary of these 
pediatric temperature red flags.
Table 6-2. Pediatric Temperature Red Flags
Age Temperature 
< 90 days > 38°C (100.4°F) or < 36°C (96.8°F)
> 3 months old > 38.5 °C (101.3°F) or < 36°C (96.8°F)
Temperature guidelines adapted from from Depinet, H., Macias, C. G., Balamuth, 
F., Lane, R. D., Luria, J., Melendez, E., Myers, S. R., Patel, B., Richardson, T., 
Zaniletti, I., Paul, R., & American Academy of Pediatrics Pediatric Septic Shock 
Collaborative (PSSC) Investigators (2022). Pediatric Septic Shock Collaborative 
improves emergency department sepsis care in children. Pediatrics, 149(3), Article 
e2020007369. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2020-007369; Eisenberg, M. A., & 
Balamuth, F. (2021). Pediatric sepsis screening in U.S. hospitals. Pediatric Research, 
91, 351–358. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41390-021-01708-y
Case Examples 
The following cases are examples of the need for vital signs on every 
patient are they are an important part in assigning an appropriate 
triage acuity level.
Example One 
A 28-year-old patient presents with generalized abdominal pain. 
Her last menstrual period is reported as 8 weeks ago. Vital signs are 
as follows: T 36.7°C (98°F), HR 120 beats/minute, RR 22 breaths/
minute, and BP 92/50mm Hg.
This patient meets the criteria for being uptriaged from level 3 to level 
2 based on her vital signs. Her increased heart rate, respiratory rate, and 
decreased blood pressure make her high risk. This presentation could 
indicate internal bleeding from a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.
Example Two 
A 15-month-old presents with their caregiver, who states the child 
has had decreased appetite, a low-grade temperature, and numerous 
liquid stools. The toddler is sitting quietly on the mother’s lap.  
They have no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and are 
not on any medications. Vital signs are as follows: T 38°C (100.4° F), 
HR 158 beats/minute, RR 42 breaths/minute, BP 86/50 mm Hg. 
Capillary refill is 3 seconds
Prior to vital sign assessment, this patient meets the criteria for ESI 
level 3. Based on vital sign assessment, the nurse should triage them to 
an ESI level 2. This patient is tachypneic and tachycardic for their age.

Example Three 
A 57-year-old presents with cough for multiple days. The patient 
tells you that they had a temperature of 101°F (38.3°C) last night.  
Vital signs are as follows: T 38.5°C (101.4°F), RR 26 breaths/minute, 
HR 100 beats/minute, and SpO2 90%.
At the beginning of the triage assessment, this patient presents as 
though they could have pneumonia or viral illness. Their low oxygen 
saturation and increased respiratory rate are a concern. After assessing 
vital signs, the nurse should uptriage the patient to an ESI level 2.
Example Four 
A 34-year-old patient assigned female at birth presents with generalized 
abdominal pain, vomiting, and constipation. She has a history of 
laminectomy and currently takes no medications. She states her 
LMP was within the last 28 days. Vital signs are as follows: T 36.5°C 
(97.8°F), HR 102 beats/minute, RR 16 breaths/minute, BP 132/80 
mm Hg, and SpO2 99%.
This patient will need a minimum of two or more resources: labs, 
intravenous fluids, perhaps intravenous medication for nausea, and a 
CT scan. The triage nurse would review the patient’s vital signs and 
consider the heart rate. The heart rate falls just outside the accepted 
parameter for the age of the patient, but other vital signs are within 
expected limits. In this case, the decision should be to assign the patient 
to ESI level 3. 
Example Five 
A 72-year-old patient presents to the ED with oxygen via nasal cannula 
for her advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. She informs 
the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand.  
The hand is red, tender, and swollen. The patient has no other medical 
problems, takes daily inhaled steroids, uses albuterol as needed, and 
takes an aspirin daily. Vital signs include the following: T 37.5°C 
(99.6°F), HR 105 beats/minute, RR 24 breaths/minute, BP 138/80 
mm Hg, and SpO 2 91% (on 2 L nasal cannula per norm, states her 
SpO2 is 90 to 91% at home). She denies respiratory distress.
This patient will require two or more resources: labs and intravenous 
antibiotics. She meets the criteria for ESI level 3. The triage nurse 
notices that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate are outside 
the accepted parameters for the adult, but this patient has advanced 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. However, because the patient 
takes a steroid for her COPD, it is possible she will not mount a 
robust immune response, so her vital signs should be considered 
in the context of both immunosuppression and the possibility of 
sepsis. These vital signs are not surprising given the patient’s history, 
so the temptation is to attribute them to her respiratory disease.  
However, given the infected bite, it is critical to consider that as a cause 
of her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate and uptriage the patient 
to an ESI 2. 
Summary 
Vital signs can reveal many things about the patient’s condition, 
including the potential risk for deterioration. They also provide a 
baseline for trending of vital signs while the patient is in the ED.  
The information in this chapter provides a foundation for 
understanding the role of vital signs in the ESI acuity system. Vital 
signs can play a more important role in the evaluation of some patients 
at triage, especially those triaged as ESI level 3. The range of vital signs 
may provide supporting data for potential indicators of serious illness.  
If any of the high-risk vital signs are exceeded, it is recommended that the 
triage nurse reassess the patient and uptriage the patient from level 3 to 
level 2 if the vital signs remain out of range.
